# Why words

2019-07-10

I've been meaning to start this for quite some time. Over the years I've had
various forms of blogs. I was on Tumblr for some time, I had a Medium page, and
my wife and I even had a blog together on Squarespace. None of them stuck, and I
only have theories of why that is. One of the main reasons I believe is that I
didn't have full control over the content. My hope with words.chronica is that
it's a place for me to dump my ramblings, talk about my experiments, and even
share some papers I'm considering writing that I have 100% control over.

A while back I read a blog post, that I regretfully can't find anymore, but it
resonated more than any other blog post had for quite some time. It made a
correlation between the current state of the internet and the current state of
traveling. When you travel you are warned of the main streets. Stay away from
those shops. It's well known that they are tourist traps. You will get lower
quality for a higher price. However, if you put a bit more effort into the
finding better places to stop that may be further out, you'll have a much better
experience. The quality will better, it may even be cheaper, and it will be more
authentic. You may even find other similar places that they recommend for you to
check out.

I believe we are falling for the main street of the internet. The easily
accessible "stores" and "shops" such as Facebook and other common social media
outlets are by far the easiest place to digest information, but at the cost of
quality (albeit not always), and the many times the cost of privacy. I envision
the internet experience returning back to a more decentralized platform where
individuals have their own site and they own their data. Alternatives to common
social platforms do exists, they just take a bit more effort. However, in my
experience you're left with a richer experience. Taking the time to research and
to find a place a bit farther off the main street is indeed more labor
intensive, but rewarding.

My hope is the that the [chronica](chronica.html) ecosystem is just that. A
central place that I fully own and have control over where my projects,
thoughts, and works can all be displayed. There is no trackers, no
advertisements, and no abstraction over what you are seeing. Everything is open
sourced and transparent. This is an alternative to me using platforms like
Medium which bombard you with advertisements and track as much information about
you and your readings as possible, or Facebook that caters what you see further
enforcing filter bubbles and essentially selling *you* as their product.

In the future I'll do a post on exactly how this site is working, but for now,
you're basically just seeing markup turned into HTML with a bit of styling.
That's all words.chronica is. [wiki.chronica](wiki.chronica.html) will show you
in more detail the projects I've been working on and small write ups on them.
Feel free to reach out by any of the means below. If you are at all interested
in creating your own site, but are unsure how, I'm more than happy to lend a
hand. Thanks for stopping by.

Chris
